Add architecture and design principles doc (#715)
nginxinc/nginx-kubernetes-gateway: docs/architecture.md

# Architecture

This document provides an overview of the architecture and design principles of the NGINX Kubernetes Gateway. The target
audience includes the following groups:

* *Cluster Operators* who would like to know how the software works and also better understand how it can fail.
* *Developers* who would like to [contribute][contribute] to the project.

We assume that the reader is familiar with core Kubernetes concepts, such as Pod, Deployment, Service, and Endpoints.

> Additionally, we recommend reading [this blog post][blog] for an overview of the NGINX architecture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, we recommend reading [this blog post][blog] for an overview of the NGINX architecture.
```

I assume this might refer to an existing or upcoming blog post - flagging this to ensure it's updated.

[contribute]: https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-kubernetes-gateway/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md

[blog]: https://www.nginx.com/blog/inside-nginx-how-we-designed-for-performance-scale/

## What is NGINX Kubernetes Gateway?

> The NGINX Kubernetes Gateway is a component in a Kubernetes cluster that configures an HTTP load balancer according to

Reviewer 2: Couldn't this technically be grpc, generic TLS, or UDP as well?

Author: This refers to the load balancer that exposes the applications in the cluster—the ingress point, which is HTTP(s). The application backends could be gRPC, TCP, or UDP, but the client will always access the applications over HTTP(s).

Gateway API resources created by Cluster Operators and Application Developers.

> If you’d like to read more about the Gateway API, refer to [Gateway API documentation][sig-gateway].

This document focuses specifically on the NGINX Kubernetes Gateway, also known as NKG, which uses NGINX as its data
plane.

[sig-gateway]: https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/

## NGINX Kubernetes Gateway at a High Level

To start, let's take a high-level look at the NGINX Kubernetes Gateway (NKG). The accompanying diagram illustrates an
example scenario where NKG exposes two web applications hosted within a Kubernetes cluster to external clients on the
internet:

> ![NKG High Level](/docs/images/nkg-high-level.png)

Author: This doc assumes some knowledge of Kubernetes, so I think this level of detail is sufficient. The diagram is color-coded to clarify which resources are created by which user. Also, the description of the figure goes into more detail about each item and the relationships shown in the diagram.

1. `nginx`: the data plane. Consists of an NGINX master process and NGINX worker processes. The master process controls
the worker processes. The worker processes handle the client traffic and load balance the traffic to the backend
applications.
2. `nginx-gateway`: the control plane. Watches Kubernetes objects and configures NGINX.
3. `busybox`: initializes the NGINX config environment.

These containers are deployed in a single Pod as a Kubernetes Deployment. The init container, `busybox`, runs before the
`nginx` and `nginx-gateway` containers and creates directories and sets permissions for the NGINX process.

The `nginx-gateway`, or the control plane, is a [Kubernetes controller][controller], written with
the [controller-runtime][runtime] library. It watches Kubernetes objects (Services, Endpoints, Secrets, and Gateway API
CRDs), translates them to nginx configuration, and configures NGINX. This configuration happens in two stages. First,
NGINX configuration files are written to the NGINX configuration volume shared by the `nginx-gateway` and `nginx`
containers. Next, the control plane reloads the NGINX process. This is possible because the two

> containers [share a process namespace][share], which gives the `nginx-gateway` process access to the `nginx` process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is possible because the two
containers [share a process namespace][share], which allows the NKG process to send signals to the NGINX master process.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: I would add a note:

Note: Because of the  process namespace sharing, containers have access to the other containers filesystem via the `/proc/$pid/root` link.

Author: I don't think adding that comment is necessary because we don't use that feature of shared process namespace.

10. (File I/O): The *NGINX master* reads the `nginx.conf` file from the mounted `nginx-conf` volume.
This [file][conf-file] contains the global and http configuration settings for NGINX.
11. (Signal) The *NGINX master* controls the [lifecycle of *NGINX workers*][lifecycle] it creates workers with the new
configuration and shutdowns workers with the old configuration.
12. (HTTP,HTTPS) A *client* sends traffic to and receives traffic from any of the *NGINX workers* on ports 80 and 443.
13. (HTTP,HTTPS) An *NGINX worker* sends traffic to and receives traffic from the *backends*.

[controller]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/controller/

[runtime]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/controller-runtime

[secrets]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/#tls-secrets

[reload]: https://nginx.org/en/docs/control.html

[lifecycle]: https://nginx.org/en/docs/control.html#reconfiguration

[conf-file]: https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-kubernetes-gateway/blob/main/deploy/manifests/nginx-conf.yaml

[share]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/share-process-namespace/

> ## Design Principles

Reviewer 3: I wonder if it make sense to put those into a separate doc, so that they are move visible. And what if we also link to it from the main README, like  below:

NGINX Kubernetes Gateway is an open-source project that provides an implementation of the [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/) using [NGINX](https://nginx.org/) as the data plane. The goal of this project is to implement the core Gateway APIs -- Gateway, GatewayClass, HTTPRoute, TCPRoute, TLSRoute, and UDPRoute -- to configure an HTTP or TCP/UDP load balancer, reverse-proxy, or API gateway for applications running on Kubernetes. NGINX Kubernetes Gateway is currently under development and supports a subset of the Gateway API.

For a list of supported Gateway API resources and features, see the [Gateway API Compatibility](https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-kubernetes-gateway/blob/main/docs/gateway-api-compatibility.md) doc.

Warning: This project is actively in development (beta feature state) and should not be deployed in a production environment. All APIs, SDKs, designs, and packages are subject to change.

Learn about our [design principles](#).
